+++
title = "Fender's Tube Amplifiers"
date = 2023-10-21T20:28:09-05:00
draft = false
+++


Consumer demand is the driver behind commercial suc- cess, and once you have demand for a product, you should do everything possible to hold onto it. Old technol- ogy can sometimes have hidden attractions that are not noticed until consumers begin to deal with their techno- logically more sophisticated replacements. Leo Fender – famous for his eponymous guitars and amplifiers – devel- oped products with just such attractions. In the 1950s, to complement his then ‘radical’ electronic instruments, he built portable amplifier-speaker consoles. He didn’t design his amplifiers in the 1950s with any thought of the controlled and sustained overdrive, nor any of the other vacuum tube amp qualities that guitar players have come to crave. In fact, his first amp designs were straight out of the RCA vacuum tube handbook.

With the help of field tests with musicians like guitar- pick-melting American surf guitar guru Dick Dale, Leo Fender created a physically and electronically reliable design to withstand use and abuse by touring perform- ers. It just happens that the combination of his robust design and the natural overdrive characteristics of tubes produces the trademark Fender sound we came to love.

Electronics subsequently evolved into more robust, com- pact and powerful transistor platforms. Unfortunately, early solid-state amplifiers became infamous for their harshness and limited dynamic range, caused almost entirely by the super clean sound and wide frequency response up to their maximum output, after which the onset of clipping occurred quite abruptly and harshly. The attack of notes (that bit immediately after the note is struck) pushes the amplifier briefly into the clipping region, producing a ‘squashy, spitting’ sound at the start of each note. If the amplifier is overdriven well into the clipping region, the type of overdrive was typically very dirty and unmusical.

Russell Hamm, in his seminal study ‘Tubes Versus Transistors: Is There an Audible Difference?’ found that bass and guitar amplifiers are often severely overloaded by signal transients. The transistor characteristics which guitarists and bassists dislike are buzzing, white-noise sound and the lack of ‘punch’. The buzz is directly related to the ‘edge’ (like the edge of a square wave) produced by overloading on transients (like the high amplitude attacks on individual notes). This white noise contains edge harmonics like the seventh and ninth that are not musically related to the fundamental.

Vacuum tube amplifiers differ from transistor amplifiers because they can be operated in the overload region without adding objectionable distortion. The combination of the slow rising edge and the open harmonic struc- ture of the overload characteristics form an almost ideal sound recording compressor. Within the 15 to 20 dB ‘safe’ overload range, the electrical output of the tube amplifier increases by only 2 to 4 dB, acting like a limiter.

Tubes also sound louder and have a better signal-to-noise ratio because of this extra subjective headroom that transis- tor amplifiers do not have. Tubes get punch from their natu- rally brassy overload characteristics. Since the loud signals can be recorded at higher levels, the softer signals are also louder, so they are not lost in tape hiss and they effectively give the tube sound greater clarity. The feeling of more bass response is directly related to the strong second and third harmonic components which reinforce the ‘natural’ bass with ‘synthetic’ bass. In the context of a limited dynamic range system like the phonograph, recordings made with vacuum tube preamplifiers will have more apparent level and a greater signal-to-system noise ratio than recordings made with transistors or operational amplifiers.

So why is this important? The sound of a tube power amplifier moving into and out of its clipping region is the sound that many bassists and guitarists crave. Additionally, musicians perceive vacuum tube-based instrument ampli- fiers to be noticeably louder than a solid-state amplifier which has the same power. This occurs because of the logarithmic response of our hearing. For example, a 100- watt amp sounds only a little more distorted when trying to deliver 110 watts. This means that you can drive the amp quite hard with a ‘musically pleasant’ amount of overdrive that sustains a volume level at the amplifier’s maximum power capability. As the note decays, the vol- ume level changes little while the sound gradually cleans up (sometimes referred to as a ‘warm bloom’).

How ironic that in an era of blistering computational power in cheap boxes, we are still trying to capture the ana- logue sonic character of Leo Fender’s classic early amps. Fender’s designs gave a characteristic full and punchy sound, suitable for many styles of the day – and later. Steel and country players like the chime-like clean sounds, and blues players were quick to discover the classic way it breaks up when pushed hard. The Fender company to this day counts vacuum tube amplifiers among its most successful product lines, despite the availability of cleaner, cheaper, more powerful transistor designs.