+++
title = 'Parable of the Fish'
date = 2023-10-21T20:28:09-05:00
draft = false
+++



Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) which measures change in blood flow related to neural activity in the brain and spinal cord has become a core tool in spinal diagnosis in the past two decades. Yet diagnosis has suffered a crisis of scientific method similar to that of drug R&D. Americans spend $90 billion annually treating back pain – roughly the same amount as is spent on cancer. Until the 1970s, the only remedy for back pain was bed rest, and most patients improved. With the advent of MRI in the 1990s, epidurals and surgery were increasingly prescribed, to treat the various ’causes’ of back pain discovered in fMRI scans. Patient recovery decreased.

Enormous amounts of data are generated by fMRI scans, and this data is error prone and difficult to interpret as brain processes are complex and often non-localized. Partial least squares regression models have been widely applied in fMRI imaging to analyse and interpret the mass of data generated in these 15–20-minute scans. Unfortunately, such analyses are only as accurate as the data, and are limited by the reliability of the brain model that is used to describe the structural model’s latent variables and factors.

The problem of fMRI data accuracy is illustrated in a widely cited article (Bennett, Baird, Miller & Wolford, 2009) that describes Dartmouth neuroscientist Craig Bennett’s fMRI scan of a whole Atlantic salmon (purchased at a local fish market, and which, as Bennett dryly notes, ’was not alive at the time of scanning’).  While the fish sat in the scanner, Bennett showed it ’a series of photographs depicting human individuals in social situations’. To maintain the rigour of the protocol the salmon, just like a human test subject, ‘was asked to determine what emotion the individual in the photo must have been experiencing’. If that were all that had occurred, the salmon scanning would simply live on in Dartmouth lore as a ’crowning achievement in terms of ridiculous objects to scan’. But the fish had a surprise in store. When Bennett got around to analysing the fMRI data, it looked as if the dead salmon was actually thinking about the pictures it had been shown.

Not only has Bennett’s study generated much mirth in a normally tedious field, but it has spawned its own slew of books – from both inside and outside of the field of brain imaging – critical of the statistical methods used to analyse all that data coming out of the fMRI machines.

One lesson should be taken away from these well-documented failures: all of the data collection and analysis in the world will not make up for the failings of a bad model.