+++
title = 'Lightbulbs and Standards'
date = 2023-10-21T20:28:09-05:00
draft = false
+++



The cartoon light bulb is the quintessential symbol of inspiration and innovation. But who actually invented the light bulb? Most Americans would respond with their own national hero Thomas Alva Edison. But it was actually British chemist Humphry Davy that proved the concept in 1809 and British physicist Joseph Wilson Swan that built a practical light bulb in 1878, offering much brighter lighting than the existing gas and arc lighting. Edison was also interested in lighting buildings and streets, but was more systematic in patenting his devices. He attempted to prosecute Swan for patent infringement, eventually merging Swan’s company into his in 1883. Edison not only had patents, but he had developed a ’system’, noting that:

‘all parts of the system must be constructed with reference to all other parts, since in one sense, all these form one machine part’ (Thomas Alva Edison, referring to an electrical grid in his article on the pho- nograph in the North American Review, 1878).

Edison and his team of engineers in Menlo Park, New Jersey, spent years building the entire electric system, from light sockets and safety fuses to generating facili- ties and the wiring network; and of course, advertising and promoting the whole system.

Edison built his entire system around direct current (DC). Unfortunately, DC line losses were so great that generators could not practically be more than about one mile away from the lightbulbs and motors they powered. This system was challenged by George Westinghouse, whose alternating current (AC) generators’ operation at 133 cycles per second (Hz, or Hertz) could distrib- ute electricity over hundreds of miles, making for much greater economies of scale. Westinghouse and Edison fought a brutal battle in the marketplace, with Edison electrocuting stray dogs to demonstrate the dangers of AC, and coining the term ’Westinghousing’ for the elec- trocution of criminals.

Westinghouse’s system had one weakness: it lacked a motor, which was becoming a major deal-breaker for industrial electrification. Factories wanted motors that could substitute for steam engines. In an attempt to satisfy this demand, Westinghouse subcontracted the building of motor designs to the eccentric genius Nikola Tesla. After an enormous amount of experimen- tation and calculation, Tesla came to the correct con- clusion that motors operated most efficiently at 60 Hz and 240 volts. Westinghouse adopted Tesla’s designs (after futilely trying to make them work at 133 Hz). And Edison ultimately was forced to admit the superiority of AC, and built his own systems, running the lines at 110 volts, adopting the same voltage used in his DC systems.

When the German company AEG built the first European generating facility, its engineers decided to fix the fre- quency at 50 Hz, because the number 60 didn’t fit the metric standard unit sequence (1, 2, 5). At that time, AEG had a virtual monopoly and its standard spread to the rest of the continent. But the order imposed by the metric system was at odds with physics. Not only is 50 Hz 20% less effective in generation, it is 10–15% less efficient in transmission and it requires up to 30% larger windings and magnetic core materials in trans- former construction. Electric motors are much less effi- cient at the lower frequency, and must also be made more robust to handle the electrical losses and the extra heat generated. Originally Europe had followed Edison’s lead, and run its lines at 110 volts. But it decided to generate at 220 volts after World War II to try to over- come the inefficiency of 50 Hz by increasing the voltage to get more power with less losses and voltage drop from the same copper wire diameter. At the time the US also wanted to change but because of the cost involved to replace all electric appliances it decided not to. In the 1950s the average US household (but not its European counterparts) already had a refrigerator, a washing machine, etc. For this reason, today only a handful of countries (Antigua, Guyana, Peru, the Philippines, South Korea and the Leeward Islands) follow Tesla’s advice and use the 60 Hz frequency together with a voltage of 220–240.

Edison may have gotten his voltage wrong (a mistake that plagues us to this day) but his other experiments with electrical lighting systems generated their own unsung successes. In 1883 Edison observed that a cur- rent flowed between the filament of an incandescent lamp and a plate in the vacuum near it when the plate was connected to the positive end of the filament, but

not when the plate was connected to the negative side. In 1899, J. J. Thomson showed that this Edison Effect was due to a stream of negatively charged particles, electrons, that could be guided by electric and magnetic fields. Fleming patented the diode in 1904 and in 1907, Lee de Forest patented the triode (which he called the Audion; the term ‘triode’ was not used until much later, after it threatened to become a trade name). For more than a half century until the commercialization of the transistor, electron tubes were the preferred choice for amplifying music.