+++
title = 'Continuous Improvement in the Mongol Empire'
date = 2023-10-21T20:28:09-05:00
draft = false
+++



12th-century Mongols were known for dramatic entrances. Under Genghis Khan, their army was incom- parably superior to any other force on earth, wiping out, in their time, most of the European nobility, and sub- duing the powerful armies of the Caliph of Baghdad. Genghis was a great innovator in psychological war- fare, generating his own propaganda which exagger- ated the brutality and decisiveness of his conquests to frighten future opponents. He instituted a professional class of bookkeepers to inventory his spoils and to impose harsh but efficient taxation on the vanquished. He thrived through superior strategy and mobility, which allowed his army to cover thousands of miles in weeks, and conquer and keep large areas of territory even though often being vastly outnumbered. There was no Mongol infantry to slow them down. Horses outnum- bered people five to one in Mongolia, and everyone was born into the cavalry.

Much of their superiority lay in their technology. Almost all of it was borrowed, but Genghis Khan improved each piece, integrating it into the development of Mongol tactics. Unlike European knights, Mongols were not burdened by heavy steel armour, but wore a silk shirt covered in light cloth armour in front, and none in back (which discouraged troops from retreat). When armour- clad knights were struck by powerful Mongol arrows, they were faced with the difficult task of removing the arrow embedded in their armour and their flesh. In con- trast, when struck by an arrow the Mongolian’s silk shirt would be carried into the wound by the arrow. Tugging gently on the silk around the arrow could free it with minimal additional wounding to the soldier. The Mongolian horses, unarmoured themselves and

carrying soldiers clad in light armour, had much more endurance than the horses ridden by the opposing medieval knights. Mongols in battle would suddenly retreat, travelling miles into their own territory to wear out heavily armed opponents, only to turn back on them when they were thoroughly worn down. Technologically advanced siege machines built by Chinese techni- cians were used in attacking fortified cities. Between battles they were disassembled and carried on horses to be rebuilt at the site of the battle. Chinese fireworks were modified to produce brass cannon to shoot balls which could breach city walls and demoralize opposing troops. Greek fire was thrown from trebuchets to burn down cities and demoralize residents. Once the main battle and city siege was over, the Mongol army would follow the enemy leader until he was killed in order to prevent him from being a rallying point for his army after war. The Mongol logistical system was distinguished by its mobility and practicality, living off the land heavily, much as General Sherman did in his march to Atlanta. Heavier equipment was brought up by well-organized supply trains. An essential feature of Mongolian tactics was the use of ‘kharash’. During a battle the Mongols would drive a crowd of local residents as a human wall, who would erect siege machines around the walls, forcing the king to attack his own subjects. Genghis Khan’s cavalry was a highly efficient, disciplined orga- nization, with superior military intelligence of a form not seen again until the 18th century. Operating in massive sweeps, extending over dozens of miles, the Mongol army combined shock, mobility and firepower unmatched in land warfare.