+++
title = 'The Fall of MySpace'
date = 2023-10-21T20:28:09-05:00
draft = false
+++



When O’Reilly Media broached the concept of Web 2.0 in 2004 the two most highly touted Web 2.0 successes based on number of users were Skype and MySpace. Each benefited from having a major distribution partner- ship during launch: the founders of Skype also founded Kazaa, and promoted the Skype service by advertising it through the Kazaa network of desktop clients. MySpace was promoted through the extensive ResponseBase/ Intermix database. In less than three years, MySpace leapfrogged early social networking leader Friendster to become one of the top five most visited sites in the US, with 46 million unique visitors and 25 billion page views in December 2005.

Sadly, this proved the highpoint for MySpace, which was subsequently acquired by Australian Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation in July 2005 for $580 million. With his Australian newspaper the Daily Mirror, Murdoch had essentially invented the modern tabloid, complete with lurid stories of alien landings and star gossip. Unfortunately, little of this tabloid expertise proved use- ful to the social network, and MySpace tanked under his ownership, leaving room after 2005 for upstart Facebook to dominate the marketplace. Murdoch sold MySpace to Justin Timberlake in 2011 for $35 million (6% of his purchase price). Timberlake laid off most of the staff, and completely relaunched the site in 2013, but it never regained its mojo.

Yet during its early years, there was reason for O’Reilly to cite MySpace as a Web 2.0 exemplar. It was launched by the former ResponseBase team within Intermix, a group with a strong background in direct email market- ing cost per acquisition (CPA) campaigns which were used to great effect in building MySpace’s consumer base. After witnessing the initial success of Friendster and having the ResponseBase/Intermix resources at their disposal, they thought they could create a strong competitor. ResponseBase had a database of around 100 million email addresses and Intermix had a number of internet sites directed to teenagers, the MySpace tar- get market.

MySpace took three months to build a site with similar features to Friendster, launching at the end of 2003. Its founders, DeWolfe and Anderson, started promoting MySpace by running a cash prize contest for Intermix’s 250 employees asking them to invite friends to use the site. This had some success, but was limited to reach- ing only a certain size. MySpace then began promoting the site offline, sponsoring parties in Los Angeles with clubs, bands and party promoters. This began to build the buzz around the site, but more importantly attracted offline groups of people to use the site together. DeWolfe and Anderson were not only clever in market entry, but adept a responding to teenagers’ needs, and adaptively executing their entrance strategy. When the small community groups of 100 to 1000 people started creating group profile pages around interests and associations, MySpace accepted this behaviour where Friendster did not. MySpace listened to user feedback and quickly iterated the product with rapid development cycles. MySpace added blogs, comment boards, message boards and instant messaging (IM) long before Friendster was able to upgrade its product given scalability issues. MySpace was also much better at addressing poor site performance (a normal problem in scaling up) whereas Friendster was not.

Small community groups were critical for the viral mar- keting that propelled MySpace to success. Once this initial audience had been established, MySpace lever- aged Intermix’s media buying and channel relation- ships, propelling it to number one status. It is unlikely that MySpace would have grown as fast as it did with- out employing this more traditional marketing tactic. Indeed, Murdoch proved that in the wrong hands a social network can be destroyed just as quickly as it can rise to success.