+++
title = 'Politics of Innovation'
date = 2023-10-21T20:28:09-05:00
draft = false
+++



In the 1970s, British historian Donald Cardwell surveyed two thousand years of developments in science and technology including the most important discoveries and inventions in human history, from the medieval horse stirrup to nuclear power. Cardwell concluded that “...no nation has been very creative for more than an historically short period” and that over the long run, nationality is not an important factor in advancing science and technology. Cardwell was unable to explain what political and social inputs were essential for successful science and technology.

In the twenty-first century, national borders and distances have declined in importance to scientific knowledge and technical information, and inventors anywhere can readily tap into global stores of knowledge, capital, equipment, and talent. In a twenty-first century environment, the American academic Mark Zachary Taylor argues that policy-makers can grow a vibrant, productive science community, creating the patents, inventions and jobs that can drive a high-tech economy by promoting a state of “creative insecurity.” Some countries are better at innovation than others because they are prepared to pay a price – deferring comforts and investing in research. Their circumstances naturally or artificially promote a state of creative insecurity which requires them to view external threats as more pressing and important than internal politics. Creative insecurity may be fostered by military threats, economic hardship or individual competitiveness, and to some extent these motivations can be manufactured.

According to Taylor, politics is a vital consideration in the way that innovation is funded, assessed and implemented, with ample room for confusion and false signaling between parties. Sadly, when couched in terms of creative insecurity, innovation easily becomes a minefield of potential triggers for racism, triumphalism, imperialism, misguided cultural relativism and abuse by demagogues and bigots. At worst, politicians may conclude that an effective science and technology may be to scare citizens into believing their country faces threats from “evil foreigners” – indeed there are ample examples today of despotic regimes doing just that. But an informed population will soon see through a manufactured bogeyman; and an uninformed population is unlikely to excel in science and technology.

Taylor’s research is extensive and finds no evidence of systematic national, geographical or racial influences on research, though he does acknowledge the political focus provided by military funding. Success requires perseverance to overcome elements of randomness, unclear objectives and unpredictable returns. Taylor paints a persuasive picture of successful innovators that embrace the hardship of creative insecurity and individual competitiveness to reap quantifiable rewards.