+++
title = 'Stealing the Company'
date = 2023-10-21T20:28:09-05:00
draft = false
+++



At first it seemed to be nothing more than a routine case of counterfeiting in a country where faking it had become an industry. In mid-2004, managers at the Tokyo head- quarters of the Japanese electronics giant NEC started receiving reports that pirated keyboards and blank CD and DVD discs bearing the company’s branding were on sale in retail outlets in Beijing and Hong Kong. NEC hired a Hong Kong forensics firm, International Risk, to investigate the possible theft of its intellectual property – its brand, its designs, its electronic circuits, its patents. After two years and thousands of hours of investigation in conjunction with law enforcement agencies in China, Taiwan and Japan, the firm discovered something much more sinister than a few impromptu workshops turning out inferior copies of NEC products. The pirates were faking the whole company.

Evidence seized in raids on 18 factories and warehouses in China and Taiwan showed that the counterfeiters had set up what amounted to a parallel NEC brand with links to a network of more than 50 electronics factories. Production included home entertainment systems, MP3 players, batteries, microphones, DVD players and so forth, manufactured in mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The counterfeiters erected phoney NEC signs outside their factories, shipped their products packaged in ‘authentic’ boxes and display cases, carried NEC business cards, commissioned product research and development in the company’s name and signed pro- duction and supply orders which were paid by the real NEC. Using the company’s name, the pirates were not content just to copy NEC products; they even developed new ranges of consumer electronic products that would sell under NEC’s brand. Steve Vickers, a former senior Hong Kong police officer and CEO of International Risk, observed that the pirates required factories to pay royal- ties for ‘licensed’ products and went so far as to issue

official-looking warranty and service documents – with the real NEC receiving complaints and warranty service requests for these counterfeit products. Criminal networks coordinated all of the manufacturing and distribution, and collected all of the proceeds for goods that ultimately found their way onto retail shelves in Taiwan, China, Hong Kong, South East Asia, North Africa, the Middle East and Europe, right alongside legitimate NEC products.

‘These entities are part of a sophisticated ring, coordi- nated by two key entities based in Taiwan and Japan, which has attempted to completely assume the NEC brand’, observed Fujio Okada, the NEC senior vice president and legal division general manager, in written answers to questions. ‘Many of these entities are famil- iar with each other and cooperate with each other to develop, manufacture and sell products utilizing the NEC brand. On the surface, it looked like a series of intellectual property infringements, but in reality a highly organized group has attempted to hijack the entire brand.’ Mr. Vickers noted that ‘the reality is that factories in China will produce what they are asked to produce’. ‘The challenge is finding out who placed the orders and who funded it.’

Once aware of the full extent of the fraud, NEC acted quickly to disrupt the supply chain and market chan- nels of the counterfeiters. Prosecutors in the southern Taiwanese city of Kaohsiung issued warrants for the local police to raid a warehouse and offices in the area where investigators seized 60 pallets of counterfeit goods, mostly audio products, carrying the NEC brand. Evidence collected in these raids also implicated factories in China, leading to late-night raids which were extensively cov- ered in the Taiwan media, with television cameras on nine factories in the cities of Guangzhou, Zhongshan, Zhuhai and Shenzhen in Guangdong Province of China.