+++
title = 'Viagra – The First Blockbuster Drug'
date = 2023-10-21T20:28:09-05:00
draft = false
+++



In 1991, inventors Andrew Bell, Dr David Brown and Dr Nicholas Terrett (also Pfizer employees at Kent) discovered that chemical compounds belonging to the pyrazolopyrimidinone class were useful in treating heart problems such as angina. Terrett was named in the 1991 British patent for sildenafil citrate (later trade-named Viagra) as a heart medicine, and some experts consider him as the father of Viagra.

Terrett, named in the 1991 British patent, and one of the first to document the erectile side effect in 1994, became known as ‘the father of Viagra’. Pfizer claims that hundreds of inventors were involved with the creation of Viagra and there was not enough room on the patent application to name them all, so only the department heads were listed. Dr Simon Campbell, who until recently was the Senior Vice President of Medicinal Discovery at Pfizer and oversaw Viagra’s development, is considered by the American press to be the inventor of Viagra. Campbell himself preferred to be known as the father of Amlodipine (a cardiovascular drug), deferring to Terrett in this honour. ‘I’m like Columbus’, commented Campbell (never the modest type) on Viagra’s development.

By I994, Nicholas Terrett and colleague Peter Ellis discovered during the trial studies of sildenafil as a heart medicine that it also increased blood flow to the penis, allowing men to reverse erectile dysfunctions. The drug acts by enhancing the smooth muscle relaxant effects of nitric oxide, a chemical that is normally released in response to sexual stimulation. The smooth muscle relaxation allows increased blood flow into the penis, leading to an erection when combined with something naughty. Dunn and Wood then worked on the crucial nine-step process to synthesize a sildenafil (Viagra) compound into a pill. It was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on 27 March 1998 as the first pill to treat impotence.

Sildenafil’s disputed paternity took a more interesting turn as doctors began noticing a remarkable side effect. Though it had only been mediocre reliever of angina, sildenafil was a reliable initiator of erections. Whatever questions surrounded the paternity of Viagra, the marketable product was undoubtedly the offspring of William C. Steere, Jr., the son of the prominent botanist William C. Steere, Sr. Steere was named to head the prescription drug division of the American pharmaceuticals firm Pfizer in 1985. Unlike his father, William Jr. had little inclination towards the academic, and had made his way to the top through the marketing ranks. A brilliant salesman and marketing tactician, Steere came to the job with a strong prejudice that the church-and-state division between marketing and R&D had outlived its usefulness (a conclusion drawn by most of Big Pharma in the freemarket environment of the Reagan years). Steere’s modest aspiration was to make Pfizer, a perennial also-ran, into the largest pharmaceutical company in the world, an aspiration goaded by the fact that Merck was the perennial 800-pound gorilla of pharmaceuticals.

At a time when the re-engineering movement was gaining traction, Steere re-engineered Pfizer’s drug pipeline around two new kinds of management teams for every new drug developed at Pfizer: an Early Candidate Management Team; and an Advanced Candidate Management Team. Out was the idea that the cloisters of R&D should be free from market guidance; or free to throw a drug over the transom expecting marketing to take it from there. In-house synergies between marketing and R&D would assure a pipeline of successful drugs. The Early Candidate Management Team would assure that R&D knew the marketing prospects of candidate drugs as they were developing and testing them. This team would include representatives from research, marketing and sales to maintain a steady dialogue that would direct diseases to which drugs might be applied, dosages, trials and so forth. Once the drug was ready for FDA submission, the first team would hand the portfolio over the second, which was chaired by a marketing person. Steere explained, ‘our goal was to communicate earlier on products to make sure that their development was such that when they entered the market, they’d be instant successes’.

Instant successes! Size matters! These were Steere’s passions throughout the 1990s when Pfizer aspired to outperform its perennial rival Merck. Then came Viagra.

Never one to miss an opportunity, Steere put the compound through a crash screening process to come up with a marketable drug; essentially, he asked marketing to ‘find’ a ‘disease’ that regarded an erection as a ‘cure’. Marketing coined a condition with the uninspiring name ‘erectile dysfunction’ (ED) and sildenafil was rechristened Viagra.

Unfortunately, there were details still to be worked out before Viagra could become an instant success. One of the stickier parts of FDA approval was that a drug was approved only for treatment of the specific malady specified in the FDA approval. Any other use (for example, of an angina drug for treating erectile dysfunction) would be considered ‘off-label’ and was strictly prohibited. Nor was there much chance that general practitioners were going to confuse angina and erectile dysfunction (ED).

Fortunately, once the felicitous effects of Viagra were identified, Steere’s in-house synergy worked brilliantly. The medical affairs division funded studies on ‘ED’ and underwrote seminars on the subject. His salesmen were tutored on the biology of smooth muscle tissue (Erectile Anatomy 101), the physiological target of Viagra.

‘Viagra crystallized some things I’d been thinking about’, Steere told Fortune at the time. ‘It struck me that a quality-of-life drug for aging would be a real winner. Look at the volume in cosmetics, which are basically nostrums that really don’t do anything.’ From Pfizer’s standpoint, Viagra was a miracle drug: it cured a ‘disease’ of rich, pill happy seniors, with only a few side effects, none which couldn’t be easily doctored.

Pfizer had also recently gained a powerful new tool in its marketing arsenal: direct-toconsumer advertising had recently been allowed by the Food and Drug Administration. In the 1980s, drugs were prescribed under the advice of physicians and patients were carefully guarded from knowing anything that might possibly hurt them. This fitted well with the physicians’ own view of their profession; as counsellors, rationers and demi-gods lording over patient health.

But Viagra, coming as it did after the FDA relaxed its rules on direct-to-consumer advertising, was not just a commercial success, but a cultural revolution in a pill. Where the baby boomers had oestrogen, ‘the pill’, in the 1960s, their older selves now had Viagra and Austin Powers to keep the revolution alive. Viagra changed the billion-dollar porn industry, which changed internet entertainment marketing.  By 2000 Viagra's worldwide sales were $1.5 billion.  None of this would have happened at the pre-Steere Pfizer where marketing and R&D occupied separate worlds.  