+++
title = 'Conspiracies'
draft = false
+++


10,000 years ago, societies of [~150](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s_number) hunted, gathered, subsistence farmed, and at the end of the day, sat around the firepit exchanging stories. Everyone could contribute in this egalitarian contest of fabulist stories, the most entertaining conferring status and gaining legitimacy for their authors.  Science, law, ethics thus gleaned were unreliable and fluid, captive in a [Gossip Trap](https://theconversation.com/dunbars-number-why-my-theory-that-humans-can-only-maintain-150-friendships-has-withstood-30-years-of-scrutiny-160676) where influence trumped fact.  Egyptian priests melded stories with nilometers to predict crop yield, and elaborate cosmologies to predict heavenly events.  These driblets of science allowed them to grow rich and powerful, fielding religious orders, armies and construction crews.  Priests were the curators and interpreters of news, law, science, and morality in service of royalty; they broadcast to their flock through temple sermons and ceremony.  And so it was for millenia as religions proliferated, morphing into preisthoods of science and law.  Printing, telegraph, radio and TV were the [new Gods of technology](https://www.amazon.com/American-Gods-Neil-Gaiman/dp/0380973650/ref=asc_df_0380973650/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=312114918153&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=14977556065872423235&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9029978&hvtargid=pla-432992956489&psc=1&tag=&ref=&adgrpid=58874700661&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvadid=312114918153&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=14977556065872423235&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9029978&hvtargid=pla-432992956489&gclid=Cj0KCQiAj_CrBhD-ARIsAIiMxT-XHLTqXOsT14Fe8V3MQJwXzUGaGOXv28CTwfDOtML8lgJSjChpSd4aAt0BEALw_wcB), and information flowed in only one direction -- from curators to the people.  All was well (so it seemed).

Then the Old World Order was challenged.  Exponential accelaration in bandwidth [tripling every 9 months claimed George Gilder](https://www.amazon.com/Telecosm-World-After-Bandwidth-Abundance/dp/0743205472/ref=asc_df_0743205472/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=312114711253&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=1902536072246505003&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9031623&hvtargid=pla-567735725442&psc=1&mcid=3208fbaa77eb3c87a95fcc99acb2433f&gclid=CjwKCAiA-bmsBhAGEiwAoaQNmgkEH7_RboKBP_vVcU2yToi7N9uV75DyGlhg0D-wlzihnB70WP0vsBoC598QAvD_BwE) made interactive 'social' media a reality.  Gutenberg's printing press gave voice to a plethora of religious and political conspiracies, instigating 150 years of European war. Five centuries later, Facebook, Twitter, TikTok competing for content and attention became platforms for a Gossip Trap redux.  As in primitive tribes ten millennia earlier, these new firepits encouraged the exchange of captivating, fabulist stories.  Conspiracy theories proliferated.  

Successful recipes for a tasty, sticky, influential conspiracy theory require a pinch of truth, a pinch of emotion, a pinch of existential threat, and a large dollop of entertainment.  A good conspiracy is nothing without a kernel of truth -- a compelling mystery, an evasive explanation by authorities; where truth is too complex to comprehend and a dishonest half-truth is the next best choice  Most importantly: conspiracy theories need to be simple, communicated only in sound bites.  To qualify as conspiracies, they need also to upend received wisdom in science, politics, religion and challenge authority.  And just like that, we've returned to a post-truth world of competing narratives -- gossip.   

Why do we devote so much of our time and attention to alleged conspiratorial acts that have no impact on our daily lives, and where we would have next to zero influence?  Maybe these are constructed of the same substance as origin myths, theologies and local gossip.  Maybe they are a low consequence strategy in the competition for revenge and social status.  Scratch the surface of popular conspiracies, and you also find religion and fabulist stories.  Conspiracy theories are made of the same stuff as faith and superstition, and demand Orwellian talents of "doublethink",  "thoughtcrime", and "2 + 2 = 5".  


Lizard people, Illuminati, Bilderberg barons  and urban legends jockey for our attention.  Did NASA  land astronauts on the moon?  Was 9/11 an inside job?  Are MacDonald's burgers filled with earthworms?  There are no truths, only probabilities.  Though the probability of any of these theories may be low, we can never be certain it is zero.  So ... maybe.  Why do we allot time and attention to such tales?  Mainly because they're great fun, effective 'ice breakers,' and captivating cocktail banter around the modern firepit.  

